# Open letter for a ban on pop-ups that prevent the consumption of information

## Dear Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert and Martin Schulz!

I am writing because of a serious problem. There is no danger to life, nor any direct financial loss. However, there is an indirect way. It is a waste of time that affects more than 400 million people. All Internet users who cannot access information freely available on the Internet without closing pop-up windows. I am writing about the legal restrictions on these pop-ups that automatically appear when websites are loaded.

My friends! I hope you will allow me to call you by that name! I can call you my friends because you have done a lot for me, even though you don't know me. I am grateful for that. I am glad that data protection has been given special attention and that regulations have been made in this regard. I am glad that it is no longer the Wild West when it comes to data management and data collection, especially on the Internet. So thank you for the way we have gone down the road of regulation. Unfortunately, something has gone wrong. To understand this, I will tell you a little bit about my experience of the development of the Internet. It is important to take what I write here with an open mind, because we are a different generation, we have different expectations, we see the world differently.

The internet has been a huge source of opportunities from the very beginning. And that is still true today. Its economic impact is unquestionable. But because it was a completely new area, there were no rules. At first, it was more a matter of habit. I'm not hiding anything, as I'm focusing on pop-up windows now, so I'll just mention briefly the things related to this. So, in the (h)eory of the Internet, in 1995, a new thing, javascript, appeared. It opened up a lot of possibilities and slowly all browsers started to support this language. Among many other features, it gave the possibility to programmatically open new browser windows, with or without user interactivity. This allowed for many good things, as well as occasionally annoying, or worse, evil things such as an unclosable browser window. It would reopen itself when closed. Or opening endless advertising windows. And I could go on and on about the problems with this. There have been a lot of memes since then, and nobody wishes that time back. Soon, in the absence of regulation, it became common practice among browsers to limit or even block these pop-ups. Everyone simply agreed that the situation was unsustainable, and that the user experience was not only bad, but also downright malicious code. This is why the industry has moved in unison and turned away from popups. Meanwhile, the browsing experience changed, because more tabs appeared within a browser and soon all browsers had this option set as default... In fact, the entire Internet community can thank the browser makers when I think of the built-in pop-up blocker. And we've come to the point where privacy has come to the fore. Not being able to profile a user or store data on their computer without their prior consent is a great development. As is the fact that prior consent can be withdrawn on request and that the data so collected must either be deleted or anonymised. These are great provisions to protect users. I fully agree with this principle. So what is the problem? The problem lies in the implementation. And unfortunately there are several problems. Let's look at them in turn

- Problem 1: Technology Unfortunately, I can't skip the industry-specific technicalities, but I'll try to be clear. And in doing so, I must apologise to the professional audience if I sacrifice professionalism and a bit of a waffle at times on the altar of clarity. Data storage on the browsing person's computer during browsing is, in short, an essential part of browsing. Client-side databases, session ID, localStorage, sessionStorage, cookies, but also so-called "temporary browsing files" not directly accessible from the website. Without these, the web browsing experience would not even approach that of the 90s. These, and their future successors, are indispensable for modern websites. Making their use subject to a specific user authorisation or decision is a pointless measure for any website. It is pointless because without them, the http protocol, which is basically designed to be stateless, is incapable of performing simple and common (and now expected) functions such as completing financial transactions (payment on a website), separating users from each other, publishing on the web (blog, social media, etc.), leaving something in progress, saving it for later, or entering a simple multi-page form. They are so essential to the operation that it is pointless to tie their use to a decision. And here I return to the generation gap for a moment. Today's generation takes these functions for granted, and it would be a clear step back to the past to abandon and/or limit them. Whereas in the 80s and 90s we had to talk about being connected in some way, today this is already in place and we focus and would focus on completely different things. So today, a solution that was totally new and impressive in the 90s is no longer sufficient.

- Problem 2: User experience I've just talked about why it's unnecessary to ask users for these approvals. But that's what websites are doing at the moment. Today, 99 out of 100 pages in the EU will pop up a cookie pop-up. And these sites, because of the previous technical peculiarities, store files on the browsing person's computer before the user decides. In most cases, these files remain regardless of the decision, and even if the website is closed immediately. Moreover, these files remain there without the user's knowledge. On the other hand, such pop-ups prevent free access to information, which is a real problem. Every website with a unique look and feel allows different ways of accepting or rejecting the pop-up area settings, so it requires special research for each site to finally get rid of pop-ups. As such, it is not in the users' best interest at all to have these pop-ups. It is in the user's interest to be able to use the service as easily as possible or to access the information as easily as possible. This (and all the popups) prevents them from doing so. The number of people with access to the internet in the EU has risen to over 90%, i.e. more than 400 million people. If there are only 100 websites visited by everyone (due to the technological peculiarities of a website like Facebook), there are a lot of other websites using data, code, resources, so 100 is a gross underestimate of things. But even so, 40 billion cookie popups are read, understood, and accepted or rejected. In reality, there are many more than that, and all of that is time that could have been spent doing other useful things for these citizens.

- Problem 3: Unintelligible legal/technological gobbledygook The text in the leaflet will be complete gobbledygook to a person not trained in the technology. Unintelligible legal text. Since most users will not understand it, the information is useless to them, as they will click the first button without reading it, in order to get rid of the pop-up window and finally consume the content. But it is also a pointless extra burden for website creators, because the technology is such that the data is stored on the user's computer before the first letter is even seen. And in case of a negative decision, the provider cannot fully delete all the data it has created from the user's computer. The technology and legal jargon can take professionals years to learn, so why should we expect this of a simple user who might just be looking for a recipe for strawberry shortcake? And then a word about the language difficulties. For the vast majority of users, it is difficult to understand even in their mother tongue such information pages, simply because they lack the background knowledge and the amount of information they are bombarding users with can take hours to read in detail. But in many cases, websites are only available in one or a few languages, so they cannot provide information in the native language of all visitors. In such cases it is particularly true that these warnings are closed unread. So, in many cases, they have failed in their original purpose.

So far, I have only mentioned pop-ups related to data protection. But it is also true in general that pop-ups on web pages hinder the free access to information. It is no coincidence that virtually all browser manufacturers, in the absence of regulation, have decided on their own discretion to restrict pop-ups, even going so far as to block them altogether. Cookie pop-ups, valuable promotions, location sharing, sending notifications, "please log in" etc. etc. These are all pop-ups that hinder the free flow of information, fast and unhindered access to services. Having worked in the IT industry for many years, I know that there are situations where pop-ups simply provide a better user experience. But one thing is for sure: only in the case of user interactivity one pops up. So, for example, moving the cursor over a small area, clicking, tilting, etc. And I'm also sure that in cases where loading a web page, or preventing immediate access to information after it has loaded, is bad.

My respectful suggestion and request would be that you consider a legal ban on pop-ups and warnings that block content consumption. It is in the interest of all Internet users.
